Fix docs (#117)
lanl/vpic: doc/src/vpicUnits.tex

\usepackage{amsmath}
\usepackage{amsfonts}
\usepackage{amssymb}
\usepackage{geometry}

\geometry{left=2cm,right=2cm,top=3cm,bottom=2.5cm}

\renewcommand{\vec}[1]{\mathbf{#1}}
\newcommand{\omegap}{\omega_{\mathrm{pe}}}
\newcommand{\ncrit}{n_{\mathrm{cr}}}
\newcommand{\vth}{v_{\mathrm{th}}}
\newcommand{\ldebye}{\lambda_{\mathrm{D}}}

\title{Units in VPIC}
\author{A. Seaton}
\begin{document}
	\maketitle

	Internally, the code uses the SI form for Maxwell's equations and the Lorentz force (i.e. not the Guassian form). However, the code requires the user to specify various constants, and these determine the unit system. In particular, the user defines:

	\begin{itemize}

> 		\item $l_{\mathrm{deck}}$: an implicit unit of length for the spatial grid

Reviewer: What do you mean by this?  Are you referring to when the user (indirectly) sets dx, dy, and dz?

Author: I just mean that, unlike the other constants, the user doesn't explicitly supply VPIC with the number l_deck so it's an implicit unit of length.

		\item $c_{\mathrm{deck}}$: the speed of light in vacuum
		\item $\varepsilon_{0,\mathrm{deck}}$: the vacuum permittivity

> 		\item $r_{\alpha,\mathrm{deck}} \equiv (q_{\alpha}/m_{\alpha})_{\mathrm{deck}}$: The charge/mass ratio of species $\alpha$.

Reviewer: The species struct has fields for both charge and mass.

Author: Indeed, but if I considered them separately then the unit system would be over-determined.

	\end{itemize}

> 	\noindent Together these fully determine the unit system used by the code. One reason for this flexibility (versus having a fixed unit system) is that VPIC uses single-precision floating point numbers. This means that all values, including at intermediate steps in calculations, must have absolute value $|x|$ between $\sim 10^{-38}$ and $\sim 10^{38}$. Depending on the problem, a unit system such as SI may require values smaller or larger than these.

Reviewer: I wouldn't say that VPIC itself has a fully determined unit system.  It just solves equations given some wave speed and field coupling on a user-defined grid.  You can't, for example, calculate the fine structure constant in the code without making assumptions about how the user is using VPIC.

Author: Yep I suppose I'm being a bit loose with the language. Does this sound better to you?
```suggestion
	\noindent Together these fully determine the user's unit system. One reason for this flexibility (versus having a fixed unit system) is that VPIC uses single-precision floating point numbers. This means that all values, including at intermediate steps in calculations, must have absolute value $|x|$ between $\sim 10^{-38}$ and $\sim 10^{38}$. Depending on the problem, a unit system such as SI may require values smaller or larger than these.
```

		Q &= l_{\mathrm{deck}}\left(\frac{c}{c_{\mathrm{deck}}}\right)^2\frac{\varepsilon_0}{\varepsilon_{0,\mathrm{deck}}}\frac{r_{\alpha,\mathrm{deck}}}{r_{\alpha}}.
	\end{align}

	\noindent The electric and magnetic field conversion factors $E$ and $B$ are then given by

	\begin{align}
		E &= \frac{ML}{QT^2} = \frac{1}{l_{\mathrm{deck}}}\frac{r_{\alpha,\mathrm{deck}}}{r_{\alpha}}\left(\frac{c}{c_{\mathrm{deck}}}\right)^2 \\
		B &= E\frac{T}{L} = \frac{1}{l_{\mathrm{deck}}}\frac{r_{\alpha,\mathrm{deck}}}{r_{\alpha}}\frac{c}{c_{\mathrm{deck}}}
	\end{align}

	\subsection{Particle Momenta}

> 	Particle momenta are the only user-facing exception to the unit system defined above. The momenta are normalised to produce a dimensionless momentum

Reviewer: I don't see how this is an exception, you just have to know that the quantity is normalized momentum, not momentum.  It's the same as the code storing cB instead of B.

Author: It depends how you look at it. You can argue that p/mc is a dimensionless quantity computed from the momentum, or that it's a momentum in units of mc. I guess I am confusing things by saying it is a dimensionless momentum AND that it is an exception to the unit system.

Happy to change it to be consistent with one or the other way of looking at it, but either way it needs to be documented. I should also add something about the magnetic field normalisation/unit - I forgot about that.

Reviewer: From `species_advance.h`, `float ux, uy, uz; // Particle normalized momentum`.  We need to be consistent with what's in the code.  Units of mc are different for each species, so you would have many momentum units in any given simulation.

	\begin{equation}
		u \equiv \frac{p}{mc}.
	\end{equation}

	This dimensionless momentum is used for example when loading particles, however the momentum density given in the hydro dumps is in the unit system defined above.

	\subsection{Common Unit Systems}

	Various common choices are made for the unit system, and we discuss a few of them here. In general, aside from ensuring that values do not exceed the limits for single-precision floating point numbers, it is often desireable to choose the unit system to ease interpretation of simulation results.

	\subsubsection{Electrostatic Plasma Units}

	In an electrostatic problem simulating an electron plasma the natural length and time-scales are the Debye length $\ldebye$ and inverse plasma frequency $\omegap^{-1}$. These are also the typical scales for the grid and time-step. Then choosing the electron charge/mass ratio so that $e/m_e$ becomes unity reduces the equation of motion of an electron to

	\begin{equation*}

> 		\ddot{\vec{r}} = \vec{E}.

Reviewer: This is misleading.  VPIC will not change the math it does based on the unit system.  It needs to be clear that this is motivation for using electrostatic units in particular decks.

Author: I'm not sure I agree that this is a problem. I get what you're saying in that there won't necessarily be fewer multiplications going on in the code, but the differential equation correctly models what the outcome of the VPIC calculations will be (assuming the problem really is electrostatic, and non-relativistic, which I suppose I could clarify).

	\subsubsection{Electromagnetic Plasma Units}

	For an electromagnetic problem, the electrostatic units above might be modified so that the length-scale becomes the electron skin depth $c/\omegap$. The Lorentz force and Maxwell's equations become

	\begin{equation*}
		\ddot{\vec{r}} = \vec{E} + \vec{v} \times \vec{B},
	\end{equation*}
	\noindent and
	\begin{align*}
		\nabla \times \vec{E} &= -\partial_t \vec{B}, \\
		\nabla \times \vec{B} &= \left(\vec{J} + \partial_t \vec{E}\right).
	\end{align*}

	\noindent The deck constants are then

	\begin{align*}
		l_{\mathrm{deck}} &= \frac{c}{\omegap}, &
		c_{\mathrm{deck}} &= 1, \\
		\varepsilon_{0,\mathrm{deck}} &= 1, &
		r_{e,\mathrm{deck}} &= -1,
	\end{align*}

	\noindent so that the conversion factors are now

	\begin{align*}
		L &= \frac{c}{\omega_{\mathrm{pe}}}, &
		T &= \frac{1}{\omega_{\mathrm{pe}}}, \\
		M &= n_e\frac{c^3}{\omegap^3}m_e, &
		Q &= n_e\frac{c^3}{\omegap^3}e, \\
		E &= \frac{m_e}{e}\omegap c, &
		B &= \frac{m_e}{e}\omegap.
	\end{align*}

> 	\noindent Note that there is no longer any dependence on temperature.

Reviewer: This is the first mention of temperature.  If it's absence is important then you should say where it is present (Debye length).

Author: Good point - I'll add that.

	\subsubsection{Laser-Plasma Units}

	For laser-plasma interaction problems, the unit system can again be modified by replacing the time-scale with the inverse laser frequency, so that unit system no longer depends on the electron density used to calculate $\omega_{\mathrm{pe}}$. The deck constants are then

	\begin{align*}
		l_{\mathrm{deck}} &= \frac{1}{k_0}, &
		c_{\mathrm{deck}} &= 1, \\
		\varepsilon_{0,\mathrm{deck}} &= 1, &
		r_{e,\mathrm{deck}} &= -1,
	\end{align*}

	\noindent where $k_0 \equiv \omega_0/c$ is the vacuum laser wavenumber. The conversion factors then become

	\begin{align*}
		L &= \frac{1}{k_0}, &
		T &= \frac{1}{\omega_0}, \\
		M &= \ncrit k_0^3m_e, &
		Q &= \ncrit k_0^3e, \\
		E &= \frac{m_e}{e}\omega_0 c, &
		B &= \frac{m_e}{e}\omega_0.
	\end{align*}

> 	\noindent where $\ncrit$ is the critical density $\ncrit \equiv m_e\varepsilon_0\omega_0^2/e^2$ In this unit system the simulation cell size and time step should satisfy $\Delta x \ll 1$ and $\Delta t \ll 1$ in order for the field solver to accurately model the laser. It is also necessary to verify that the cell size resolves the Debye length, which is often a more restrictive condition. Additionally, the normalised electric (or magnetic) field is the parameter $a_0$. For $a_0 \ll 1$ this is the electron quiver velocity divided by the speed of light, while $a_0 \gtrsim 1$ indicates a relativistic field intensity which will lead to effects such as relativistically induced transparency and relativistic self-focusing.

Reviewer: Electric field normalized to what?

Author: I mean that the electric field in this unit system is equal to a0. I can rephrase the sentence to make that clearer.

	\subsection{Choosing Macroparticle Weight}
	When calculating the fields generated by a macroparticle, the code uses the species charge and macroparticle weight to calculate a total charge for the macroparticle:

	\begin{equation}
		q_{\mathrm{MP}} = wq_{\mathrm{s}}.
	\end{equation}

	\noindent For this to result in an amount of current deposition consistent with the desired physical particle density, the macroparticle weight should be defined such that the charge contained in volume $V$ is the same for the macroparticles as for physical particles, i.e.

	\begin{align*}
		q_{\mathrm{p}}n_{\mathrm{p}}V &= q_{\mathrm{MP}}n_{\mathrm{MP}}V \\
			&= wq_{\mathrm{s}}n_{\mathrm{MP}}V,
	\end{align*}

	\noindent where $n_{\mathrm{p}}$ and $n_{\mathrm{MP}}$ are the physical particle and macroparticle number densities (macroparticles per unit volume) respectively. So, the particle weight must satisfy

	\begin{align}
		w = \frac{q_{\mathrm{p}}n_{\mathrm{p}}}{q_{\mathrm{s}}n_{\mathrm{MP}}} = \frac{\rho_{\mathrm{p}}}{\rho_{\mathrm{s}}}.
	\end{align}

> 	\noindent This illustrates that there is a degree of freedom available in that the species charge defined in the deck does not have to be the same as the physical species charge.

Reviewer: I think this is really the key insight to understanding units in VPIC.  The physical properties of particles are independent of the equations VPIC solves, so there are many ways you can coax the math into representing your physical system.  I'd like to see this as a running theme throughout.

Author: Could you suggest more specifically what should be changed/added?

My understanding is that the user can set various constants that determine the unit system they use for modeling their problem, and on top of that has the freedom to choose an arbitrary macroparticle species charge provided that the particle weight is consistent with the physical particle charge density. Have I missed something?

	\subsection{Consequences of $q_{\mathrm{s}} \neq q_{\mathrm{p}}$}

> 	The possibility of $q_{\mathrm{s}} \neq q_{\mathrm{p}}$ means that the code has no way of calculating numbers of physical particles since it doesn't know the true particle charge. VPIC has been carefully designed to produce valid output despite this, which for example is why the hydro dumps contain charge density rather than number density. Users should therefore also ensure that any custom diagnostics do not assume $q_{\mathrm{s}} = q_{\mathrm{p}}$.

Reviewer: I don't think there's any careful design here.  The number density doesn't appear in the equations VPIC solves, so VPIC doesn't know what the number density is.

Author: Isn't this kind of splitting hairs?

I don't see a problem with saying it is 'carefully designed' - perhaps it is obvious to you that this is how the code has to be set up but it might not be to other users of the code?

		c_{\mathrm{deck}} &= 1, \\
		\varepsilon_{0,\mathrm{deck}} &= 1, &
		r_{e,\mathrm{deck}} &= -1,
	\end{align*}

	\noindent so that the conversion factors are now

	\begin{align*}
		L &= \frac{c}{\omega_{\mathrm{pe}}}, &
		T &= \frac{1}{\omega_{\mathrm{pe}}}, \\
		M &= n_e\frac{c^3}{\omegap^3}m_e, &
		Q &= n_e\frac{c^3}{\omegap^3}e, \\
		E &= \frac{m_e}{e}\omegap c, &
		B &= \frac{m_e}{e}\omegap.
	\end{align*}

	\noindent Note that there is no longer any dependence on temperature.

	\subsubsection{Laser-Plasma Units}

	For laser-plasma interaction problems, the unit system can again be modified by replacing the time-scale with the inverse laser frequency, so that unit system no longer depends on the electron density used to calculate $\omega_{\mathrm{pe}}$. The deck constants are then

	\begin{align*}
		l_{\mathrm{deck}} &= \frac{1}{k_0}, &
		c_{\mathrm{deck}} &= 1, \\
		\varepsilon_{0,\mathrm{deck}} &= 1, &
		r_{e,\mathrm{deck}} &= -1,
	\end{align*}

	\noindent where $k_0 \equiv \omega_0/c$ is the vacuum laser wavenumber. The conversion factors then become

	\begin{align*}
		L &= \frac{1}{k_0}, &
		T &= \frac{1}{\omega_0}, \\
		M &= n_ek_0^3m_e, &

> 		Q &= n_ek_0^3e, \\

Author: This is a typo - the k_0 exponents should be -3.
```suggestion
		M &= n_ek_0^{-3}m_e, &
		Q &= n_ek_0^{-3}e, \\
```
